research has been showing now for about
20 years that when women are in the
point in the cycle when estrogen is high
that that's associated with an increased
preference for testosterone cues and
this of course begs the question well
then what happens if a woman is on
hormonal birth control and is never in
the estrogen dominant phase of her cycle
then what happens and researchers have
since asked that question and what they
tend to find is that women who are on
hormonal birth control desire a somewhat
less masculine male face and male voice
and there's been some research even
showing that if women chose their
Partners when they're on hormonal birth
control and then discontinue it that
this can lead to changes in how they
perceive and how attracted they are to
their
[Music]
partner hello everyone watching and
listening today I'm speaking with
researcher professor and author Dr Sarah
hill we discuss her new Landmark book
this is your brain on birth control the
surprising science of women hormones and
the law of unintended
consequences we break down and analyze
sex-based differences in regret
competition and academic striving the
balance between life exposure and
safeguarding when raising a child the
practice of mate Choice copying among
women and why our hormones are a
foundational part not just of our
physical makeup but of who we are most
deeply and who we have the potential to
become so Sarah I thought for years that
the 20th century would basically be
remembered for three
things the hydrogen
bomb the transistor the microchip and
the pill and that the
Hill was perhaps the most revolutionary
of the three and that it was also
equivalent to a speciation
mutation that that's how profound it is
now the first chapter of your book this
is your brain on birth control is what
is a woman and that's become a Trope and
a
satirical and a what would a satirical
cliche and people laugh at the fact that
it's even being posed but actually don't
think it's that funny because I think
that with the Advent of hypothetically
100% reliable birth control the question
of what is a woman actually becomes a
real question because a woman who has
voluntary control over reproductive
function is not the same creature as a
woman who doesn't and not even a little
bit and so then the question so so it's
imagine imagine this and then we can
talk through the book
um if sex is no longer tied rep to
reproduction then in principle women's
sexual behavior can
become equivalent to men's sexual
behavior because the risk is now the
same if women are acting like men
sexually then why aren't they men like
how are they different and then if women
for if if sex is no longer tied to
reproduction
tightly and women are free from
involuntary child rearing and bearing
then how are they different from Men in
the broader label labor market and with
regards to General productivity and the
answer is we have absolutely no idea and
that's why the questions come comes up
so I'd like to know why did you start
the book with this question what is a
woman
what the way you open something is
obviously to some degree the way you
frame it so why why did that phrase why
did that phrase jump out at you well for
me it was really important because
because so my background is in
evolutionary biology and so I spent most
of my uh career trying to understand um
Behavior using the lens of uh Darwin's
theory of evolution by selection and one
of the big you know sort of uh
paramounts of that theory and and
something that's really a Cornerstone to
it is is the differences between the
Sexes right and that you have biological
males and biological females and how do
we Define them you know how do we Define
what is a male what is a female and what
a male is is the it's the sex that has
the smaller mobile gametes that has less
investment in Offspring and females have
the metabolically expensive immobile
gametes um and they have a relatively
large minimum investment and so one of
the big ways and and sort of the the
foundation of all reliably occurring sex
differences in all sexually reproducing
species are these small differences and
this doesn't seem like it would be that
big of a deal like wow like your sex
cells are smaller than my sex cells like
who cares but that actually turns out to
be completely foundational in terms of
setting the stage for different minimum
levels of investment and Offspring which
then sets the stage for the evolution of
sex differences okay okay so let's dive
into that a little bit because people
are people need to understand exactly
what this means so you relate sex
differences when you're trying to define
a woman to the difference in size
between the sperm and the Egg and an egg
is pretty small and it doesn't look like
much of an investment but a sperm is way
smaller but the thing that's so
interesting about that is that that you
could say that that difference is
fractal in nature is that it's echoed at
every single biological level all the
way up the chain to overt Behavior right
and so the definition of a woman the
definition of female maybe even more
broadly female is the sex that invests
more is compelled to invest more in Sex
and sex sex and reproduction
and reproduction wouldn't be just sex
this is another thing that the the
narrower evolutionary biologists get
wrong I think it's one of the flaws in
Dawkins thinking for example is that you
can reduce SE reproduction to sex but
that's foolish because human beings have
a high investment
strategy uh in relationship to the
propagation of their children and so
reproduction for human beings doesn't
end with sex for mosquitoes it ends with
sex right for human beings it just
starts with sex and we have an 18year
investment and at least the first three
years of that falls I would say by
necessity more heavily on women and
really heavily on women right I think I
think they say among chimpanzee females
the chimpanzee mother carries its infant
something like 500 Miles clasp to its
chest in the first year right and so a
woman not another issue maybe too is
that like is a woman a single organism
or is a woman a part of the mother
infant diad right so right well so so
that's a whole that that's a can of
worms that we can we can open I mean
there there's this whole Theory it's a
Hamilton's theory of Inclusive fitness
which is just this idea that your own
Fitness just in terms of what your
genetic representation in future
Generations is likely to be is something
that depends both on own genes but then
also the genes of your relatives and and
for women um in particular who have all
of that you know invested in their
offspring that this I mean it is an
extension of yourself and and our
relatives are an extension of oursel and
there's no um relationship that um is
like that evolution is shaped in a way
that favor is just unmitigated
investments in the relationship between
mother to child um because there's
certain 100% or certain 50% relatedness
so mothers always know that this is
their child you have Mother's
reproductive value meaning the
possibility that she could translate her
energy into additional reproduction that
is decreasing while that of her infant
is increasing and so it's essentially
like passing the evolutionary baton from
one generation to the next between these
two individuals who have the highest
levels of relatedness that's possible in
nature outside of identical twins so so
I've wondered about this with regard to
the
transformation at puberty in female
emotional response so the personality
data indicates that boys and girls are
approximately equivalent in terms of
their sensitivity to negative emotion
but that changes at puberty and
so and so and the change seems permanent
and it seems like it's hormonally
mediated and so I've been trying to
understand so and so what happens at
puberty is that women become more sens
itive to the entire panoply of negative
emotions because they Clump together and
so and you might say well that's
cultural but it's not because if you
look at the societies that have advanced
the farthest in terms of gender equality
at the social and economic levels the
differences in trait neuroticism so
that's that sensitivity to negative
emotion between men and women are larger
than they are in less
egalitarian in less egalitarian
societies so when the society becomes
egalitarian the genetic difference is
maximized rather than minimizing okay so
then the question is well why would
women be more sensitive to negative
emotion because that comes at a cost and
the cost is at minimum higher levels of
depression and anxiety but also higher
General levels of unhappiness so then
you think okay they're more sensitive to
threat why is that useful well they're
smaller than men at puberty and so they
should be more sensitive to physical
combat that threat M but they're
sexually vulnerable and that's a huge
that's a huge deal and not to be
underestimated yes and I mean in most
societies for most of human history an
unaccompanied woman was a target of
attack right right right so but then the
third thing that's most important I I
think I want to know what you think
about this is that well women are more
attuned to threat because they're
proxies for the vulnerability of their
infant and so women May pay a
psychological cost for being more
sensitive to threat which is that
they're more unhappy and that they're
more anxious but the benefit of that is
that they're more alert to any signs of
danger or predation or or threat in the
environment and they can alert well
they're going to alert their husband
generally speaking or the rest of the
community to that now that also means
they're going to be more susceptible to
false positives right they're going to
respond to threat when there's none
there but if you're taking care of a
dependent infant and you're over
responsive to threat that's probably the
right place to tune your errors so and
and that seems to me also a reflection
of this increased investment by women so
they have an increased emotional
investment in their offspring as well as
an increased physiological investment
right so right so so so okay I'll start
with the woman piece but there's also
some interesting things that happen with
testosterone during puberty to men that
turn that off um and so I would want to
be able to return into that as well but
um with women I mean absolutely the
thing that we need to remember is that
the process of evolution by selection
didn't wire us to be happy or satisfied
or or any it's like it has designed us
to survive and to reproduce and part of
that means that we're going to feel kind
of terrible some of the time and part of
women's design you know sort of the
design of our psychology is such that it
does it it's like a smoke detector it's
tuned to picking up on even subtle cues
of possible danger just because the
potential cost associated with what
would happen if that actually if that
danger is real is much greater for women
um for a lot of different reasons some
of which you've touched upon I mean
there's one is that women are mothers so
it's like you know it's like you hear
like you're eating for two you're
feeling danger for two you know you're
having to protect yourself and your
Offspring You're more physically
vulnerable because of course you're
physically you know women are smaller
and have less upper body strength sexual
vulnerability for the reasons you talked
about mean unfortunately sexual violence
has been something that's been present
as long as um we've been around and it
certainly it's something we see in all
species with choosy females you'll have
males who want to override that choice
and um and so there's a lot of reasons
that wom manipulation too it's not
merely that women are overpowered
physically it's that they're also
susceptible to very devious manipulation
on the part of mauell and and
Psychopathic men and they need to be
alert to that that form of deception as
a threat as well right as well and yes
and and even also with with other
females and and and and the reason for
this is that you know when you think
about the cost for a woman if she's
duped so let's just talk about sexual
deception right if a woman is duped she
could end up pregnant there's a 9month
investment there right and if you look
especially at historical um you know
types of populations like modern hunter
gatherer groups if you have a a woman
who doesn't have a father investing the
child the risk of infant mortality is
like
80% I mean it's very high and and the
risk of death during child birth even is
very high so women are putting their
lives at risk every time they get
pregnant and then to get pregnant and
have a really high-risk infant that's
not getting invested in she's not get
and the reputation too yeah and the
reputation I mean there's so many costs
to that and the costs just aren't that
you know it's not symmetrical for men
the cost of those things aren't the same
and so our brains are wired to be
differently sensitive to those kinds of
cues because the consequences are so
much more dire if you have a female body
compared to if you have a male body
which do you know it is there a
literature on okay one to tell me if
I've got this wrong okay all right so we
talked about the different reproductive
strategies say of mosquitoes and human
beings mosquitoes have like a zero
investment strategy you have a million
Offspring all of them die but like one
but that's okay cuz that's replacement
whereas human beings it's unbelievably
heavy investment then you look within
human beings women invest more than men
then you could look within men and you
could say there are men who invest less
and Men Who invest more okay so the men
who invest less they're the short-term
Mater types now I've been looking into
the personality predictors of short-term
mating strategies and they're not that
positive so the personality theorists
who've been investigating the so-called
dark tetrad which is a group of you
might say undesirable descriptors
psychopathy narcissism melanism which is
manipulativeness and sadism because they
had to add that to it those traits are
much more um PR pronounced among men and
women but particularly among men who who
adopt a short-term mating strategy right
and so now so one of the things I'm
wondering about is it it's related to
that so that men who adopt that
short-term M mating strategy they love
them and leave them right there's no
let's say there's little postcoidal
regret there's no guilt or shame
associated with short-term mating
opportunities do you know if there's a
literature detailing the difference in
response to short-term mating episodes
between men and women are women more
likely to evince regret in the aftermath
of short-term mating episodes one night
stance oh yeah absolutely there's a
there's a rich literature and sexual
regret and exactly as you would expect
when you look at what people regret
sexually um women regret more these
short-term mating opportunities that
they um you know participated in men
more often regret those that they didn't
participate in so men opportunties yes
missed opportunities so men sexual
regret tends to sort of cluster around
things that they wish they would have
taken advantage of and they did not
whereas women's tends to Cluster more
and I really wish I wouldn't have had
sex with that
idiot right right now do you know is
there a personality literature that's
looked at individual differences in post
short-term sex regret so like are the
are the women less likely to show regret
also more likely to have dark tetr
personality traits like there's got to
be predictors of regret right now you
expect neuroticism would be one because
that would just predict negative emotion
in general I suspect agreeableness is
another predictor is that the women who
are more agreeable compassionate polite
more inclined to car take and bond so I
would suspect that it's the more
feminine women who are most more likely
to show postcoidal regret I suspect the
same thing would be true of men I bet
you the more feminine men are also more
likely to manifest that pattern of
regret diversify your savings with
physical precious metals while
stockpiling silver in your home safe
with Birch gold groups most popular
special of the year now through December
22nd for every $5,000 you spend with
Birch gold they'll send you a 1o silver
eagle coin for free text Jordan to
9898917350
[Music]
this year just text the keyword Jordan
to 9898 98 to claim your eligibility
with an A+ rating with the Better
Business Bureau and thousands of happy
customers now is the time to buy gold
from Birch gold text Jordan to
[Music]
9898917350 a lot of it so in in the
personality literature and I'm aware of
that I only know that there was a dark
Triad
so sadism they had to they had to add
sadism that's real fun n yeah yeah
positive Delight in the suffering of
others yeah wow wow I wonder if he's got
a brother um like that's just a terrible
that's a terrible quality that's for
sure um so uh no so I'm not I'm not
terrible I'm familiar with the that but
when I when I think about things I tend
to think about um just because
personality isn't really my area more
The evolutionary area I I tend to think
about the like you know my prediction
would be um from an evolutionary
perspective would be that we would see
women experiencing more sexual regret
when the costs are higher right so like
what are the costs associated with
having made that decision that you made
right so whether it's reputational CA so
for example a woman who has more to lose
reputationally from having capitalized
on that shortterm mating strategy I
think that she would experience stronger
sexual regret I bet I bet you could
predict that by looking at the
relative H just imagine there's a
Continuum of men with regards to the
socioeconomic status markers of their
potential as providers I suspect that
this might seem obvious but it would be
nice to see it demonstrated that the
larger the gap between the woman and the
man in terms of
status yes the more regret yes no I I
would think so Abol because she sold
herself short and the risk of that is
too high right yes no absolutely
absolutely and also I mean you know even
the things that would influence her her
biological cost right so for example if
we're talking about short like immediate
regret um a woman who's near high
fertility in her cycle where pregnancy
is possible I'm assuming that in her
hormonal thing would be predict would be
telling her like oh like that was
terrible like why did you do that or and
I would also expect you'd see more
sexual regret at Peak fertility across
the LIF see now we have a perfect study
design we could look at personality dark
tet red traits
and number of days deviation from
Maximum fertility as predictors of
short-term coidal regret yes and and
across a lifetime too and we could spend
three years getting that through an
Ethics Committee and not and then
another three years trying to get it
published right right right right right
right yeah yeah yeah yeah so all right
so back to so back to what is a woman so
okay so what we've talked about so far
is that what is the definition of female
M okay and the female is the member of
uh sexually reproducing species who
invests
more at least at see that's the qu the
issue at least at the level of the of
the gamet do you want to explain to
everybody what a gamet is just so they
know yeah so hey so so a gamet is a sex
cell um and it's it's it's your egg or
it's your sperm so it's like 50% it has
50% of your genetic material in it um
and it is fused with a gam of the other
kind if you make eggs it fuses with
sperm and that is how we produce life um
and yes you know the the initial greater
investment that women make is just the
starting point of as you said it it it
it's like fractal it it it's exponential
um increased investment because a
selection continues to reinforce greater
investment because of that large initial
investment it's like a hand of Poker
right if you put in Crystal that that
makes a diamond around it right exactly
so if you put in $500 in a in the first
round of betting and we're playing poker
and I put in a buck you have more to
lose if that hand goes sideways than I
do right and that Echoes all the way up
the all the way up the okay so that's
very interesting too because the people
who claim that that sexual identity is
merely culturally constructed fail to
take into account the fact that that
difference in investment Echoes at every
single level of the biological ladder
right it's not merely something it's
certainly not something that's reducible
to chromosomal difference which is
another way of defining the difference
between men and women you didn't pick
that you picked investment okay so why
why did you pick in it's not just you I
know that that tends to be the bi the
biological stance but would you say that
the the chromosomal difference XX versus
XY is of lesser significance than the
investment issue or does it matter
because they're so tightly linked well
well they are so tightly linked but I
mean honestly if evolution by selection
doesn't see it it doesn't matter like in
a lot of ways the the gears and
sprockets that create us um those pieces
like if you're trying to make
predictions about behavior and sort of
like the you know what types of things
have been reinforced by this process of
inheriting traits that work meaning that
they promote survival and reproduction
and those that don't um it's only what
selection sees that matters and it never
sees our chromosomes what it sees is
investment right and and those those
individuals who um have this really
large you know minimum investment and
they're only able to produce X number of
Offspring instead of X prime number of
Offspring um that those individuals what
the best way that they can increase the
probability of continuing their genetic
lineage is through a heavy investment
strategy and that's less true for this
other sex and so sex you you know
biological sex and again you know starts
off with these small differences in the
size of our sex cells but then um sort
of recapitulates at every all
these imagine just for the sake of
argument how that would recapitulate
even cognitively yes right now men for
example men understand that there's a
relationship between how successful they
are and how attractive they are to women
like and and part of what they motivates
them is the game of that competition so
I worked with high-end lawyers for about
15 years both men and women and and
found some very interesting differences
in that but the men even regarded the
money they made in bonuses at the end of
the year for outstanding performance
they weren't so interested in the money
they were interested in the money as a
means of keeping score it was a means of
winning the competition and you might
say well competition for what and the
answer to that is well let's call it
competition not for status exactly but
for reputation but the consequence of a
stellar reputation is that and men who
have that are much more attractive to
women and you might say well women go
after wealth but I think that's nonsense
and I think that's also Bel lied by the
relevant evolutionary biology Theory
because what it shows and tell me if
I've got this wrong is that women use
wealth as a marker for attractiveness
because they use wealth as a marker for
competence and what they're after is the
ability to generate wealth and and and
to and to share it and to be generous
with it has to be both productivity and
generosity and a decent marker for the
capacity to generate wealth Is wealth
although it's not the only criteria so
women are looking for competence and Men
it's a very strange thing about men you
know they compete among themselves for
competence-based
reputation and now I've been trying to
figure out why because you can imagine a
like a a movie scenario where um you
know the quarterback of the foot
football team wins A major championship
and all the other men put him on his
shoulders and you know bring him out of
the stadium and he sleeps with the
cheerleader that night and you might ask
yourself well why in the world would the
men group together to elevate a given
man to that sort of status if it means
that he's going to be the one that
successfully reproduces and my suspicion
is that men learned to Value
competence probably as a consequence of
hunting yes so
any given Hunter no matter how good he
is at hunting is going to fail in most
hunts so now if Men band together to
hunt then the collective success is much
larger and so what that means is that if
you're going to be a hunter that
provides a cross hunting bouts your
skill as a hunter is one determinant but
your interpersonal skill in negotiating
and establishing relationships with the
rest of the hunters is even more
important so among Hunter gatherers for
example if you're the one who brings
down the animal it's incumbent on you to
downplay your contribution and to
distribute the best parts of the animal
to other people and you're doing that to
Foster your reputation as a generous
person and you're doing that in part to
ensure that there's reciprocity in food
distribution across multiple hunts now
the men are going to be willing to
elevate the highest Hunter to the
highest position because I think it's in
their Collective
interest it's in their Collective
interest and in their individual
interest to be the followers of the best
man and I think that's so important in
terms of their own reproductive Fitness
which would be tied to the provision of
food across hunts that they're willing
to take the reproductive hit that's what
would you say implicit in elevating any
given man among all other men you could
think about that in in terms of hunting
and you could think about that in terms
of of combat too you know if you put the
most heroic Warrior on your shoulders
you give him an evolutionary Edge but if
you're in his group well then you've got
the benefits of being with The Greatest
Warrior and the greatest hunter and so I
don't know if the evolutionary
biologists have been able to calculate
out the relationship between
establishing a reciprocal relationship
with a great hunter or great warrior
versus the costs of men competing to
elevate a given to the highest possible
position it's a very weird thing that
men do no I think that I think you're I
think you hit the nail in the head
though I mean I think that the benefits
of aligning yourself with somebody who's
very powerful that I mean think about it
if there's somebody and like let's say
that he's you know 1.0 and you're sort
of 1 point one um and so there's
somebody who's who's a better performer
than you you could get your ass kicked
if you keep trying to have to you know
fight with this guy so there's a big
cost to you to trying to to overturn
this person and there's a lot of benefit
of aligning with the person who's also
really competent that's especially true
if it's a Paro distribution in terms of
competence right because the really
competent person might be like a hundred
times more competent well right exactly
and so it's like I think that there's
there's a lot of benefits that come
especially to men because of the hunting
context of aligning with another man in
that context and there's also this um
tendency in other so this has been very
well studied in non-human animals um but
we see a very similar version of this in
human
but have you ever heard of lecking
lecking behavior so a Leck is a place
where males within a species will gather
um to attract mates it's almost like a
club it's like the like the frogs like
frogs for example are lecking species
and the males will all go to this
display area and they croak right and
and this is what attracts the females
and so the females will go toward where
they hear the loudest most impressive
croak because that male generally is
larger in body size and has higher
levels of testosterone and so the louder
male attracts all the femal all the
females and so the males all want to
hang out with this guy because he's
attracting all the women and the same is
true if we if men align themselves with
um yeah with with you know somebody
who's really high performer I mean if
you go out for drinks with Tom Brady
it's not too bad to be Tom Brady 2.0 you
know you're going to be able bask in the
reflective Glory bask in the reflective
Glory right well and the women would
also assume that if the extraordinarily
High status male is hanging around with
some character who looks like a dweeb on
the surface that there might be hidden
depths and utility to his character or
advantages in the mere fact that he's
proximal absolutely so women use that a
lot and in fact some of my very early
research um this is like this is going
deep this is when I was in graduate
school I studied this phenomenon in
humans mate Choice copying because this
is another thing that you see in females
of other species but you also see it in
us and this is males tend to be a
somewhat ambiguous stimulus package um
because most males a lot of the
qualities that women are looking for
aren't immediately available just based
on physical appearance right right so
women have to kind of sus out like what
what is there about this guy and so when
women see a beautiful woman with kind of
an average looking guy the first thing
they think is what he must be rich um or
he must have some really amazing
personality he must be really high in
status um and I wonder is that magnified
if he's unattractive because one of the
things you might ECT is that if a very
beautiful woman is with a man who's very
nondescript that there must be something
about him that's absolutely Stellar
absolutely yes and so the magnitude of
the gap between the the woman how
beautiful the woman is and then the
appearance of the man sort of um is
linked with the degree to which women
perceive that he has these amazing
hidden qualities that make him a
desirable partner the bigger the Gap the
more amazing the qualities the smaller
the Gap the less amazing the qualities
oh that's very funny I so the right the
proper mating strategy is if if you're a
spectacularly under endowed male is to
hire a beautiful wom woman to go to
clubs with you absolutely absolutely and
you would actually probably do better
than a a more attractive man with the
same woman because people would think
that you must really have something
going on to have attracted her and look
like that right right oh that's insanely
complicated that's insanely insanely
comp comical that's insanely comical all
right all right so okay so what is a
woman so we've we've defined that as the
the the the sex that invests more and we
pointed out that
across all the way echoing all the way
up the biological ladder from the
cellular to the
cognitive women females are the sex that
in invests more oh yeah the other thing
about that was that
well women are going to invest more too
because and you already pointed this out
but it's worth making it clearer because
they have to so I I think I I looked at
one point I looked up the world's record
for most children a woman ever had and I
think it was in the hundreds actually
maybe maybe not maybe I've got that
wrong maybe I've got that wrong it
doesn't matter exactly because you could
imagine if a woman had you know a set of
triplets every year for 10 years then
that would give her 30 infants so we
could say the upper bound on female
fertility with regards specifically to
her children is going to be no more than
50 right right and that's a generous
estimate whereas with men it's like
10,000 100,000 There's No Limit there's
none right so women are going to invest
more in their children too because every
child and you already pointed this out
is comparatively more valuable then you
also said something interesting which is
that as a woman ages her children
actually become comparatively more
valuable than she so does this mean this
is strange thing
though is there evidence that women's
love for their children increases as
their children age I mean because women
are so invested in infants it's hard to
maybe it's like this I don't so I've not
seen anything specifically that has
addressed that very question but they
have done studies where they look at the
difference between for example older
mothers and younger mothers it's a world
of difference I mean when you look at
amount of investment that goes on like
if you're an older mother compared to a
younger mother older mothers invest more
they spend more time investing um and
and all of these things that you would
expect given that their reproductive
window is closing so it's like their the
the opportunity cost of investing in
that child are less than it would be if
you're a 20-year-old woman because if
you're a 20-year-old woman and investing
in an existing child There's an
opportunity cost that comes to you for
not using that energy to have another
child right right and so you're not
making that tradeoff when when you're an
older mother the holidays are rapidly
approaching but we can find peace and
calm in the craziness of the season with
hallow the number one Christian Prayer
app in the world immerse yourself in
Christmas in Advent prayers meditations
and peaceful Christmas music hallow also
offers an extensive library of Bible
reading plans accompanied by insightful
Reflections and audio guided meditations
whether you're a season Bible reader or
just starting your journey Hall provides
a platform for you to engage with
scripture like never before a great
place to start is with father Mike
schmitz's Bible in a year in which he
offers brief daily readings and
Reflections available on the Hallow app
the Hallow app also helps you connect
with a community of like-minded
individuals sharing experiences insights
and encouragement along the path to
spiritual growth this Christmas join
Hallow's Christmas prayer challenge
Advent with CS Lewis for the 25 days
leading up to Christmas you can focus on
the real reason for the season with
prayer meditation and Christmas music on
hallow download the app for free at
hall.com Jordan for 3 months free that's
hall.com
Jordan and so um think that do you think
there's an Optimum there that we don't
know because you know height Jonathan
height wrote um the codling of the
American mind okay and I've been very
interested in this rise of what I like
to think of as the devouring mother is
that the over invested parent yes okay
so instead of putting that on the
shoulders of the given parent I've been
trying to understand the cultural
context that might make overinvestment
more likely so so you can imagine well
fewer children yes so if you have 10
children you're obviously not going to
invest in you're not going to attend to
each of them as much they're going to
attend to each other more
so more one child families okay older
parents yes right so they're going to be
more conservative to begin with because
you get more conservative as you get
older but they're also going to invest
more in their children right and so and
so so older and then also richer parents
because if you're older you're richer
and so part of the reason that children
are coddled as far as I can tell to the
degree that they are and overprotected
is because mothers are not old enough to
be grandmothers they're rich and they
only have one child right and too much
time on their hands too much time on
their hands also because it's like
historically women would have been out
Gathering food all the time and now if
you have women and and there's plenty of
women who work and are and are still you
know overindulging in their children but
a lot of times when you see this it
tends to happen more frequently and more
sort of exaggeratedly in um in homes
where where women aren't working outside
yeah so you know one of the things I've
talked to my daughter and my
daughter-in-law about when they're
trying to figure out how to um optimally
care for their young children is how
they and I talked to a lot of my clients
too because they face the same problem
is how do you balance as a woman how do
you balance the need of your children
especially under the age of three for
continuous intense maternal presence
with the with the pursuit of your own
interests and my sense is that there's
an optimized balance there because one
of the things that children should see
is that adults including women have good
things to do with their adult time and
so that's a good thing to model
absolutely but then also if you have
your own Pursuit
as a woman then you're not going to
interfere too much in your child's life
because you actually have a life and one
of the things I think that protects
children against that proclivity of
maybe excessively
neurotic women to
overinvestment is not this this is
historically unprecedented you know
through most of human history no one was
that rich no well I mean yeah women
never I mean it was like we always
played a role in subsistence you know
even though women were also mothering
they were also finding food and they
were also you know tending to whatever
the dwelling was and and having to
maintain relationships and having to go
and get water and the children were
having to go to work and help with these
things and so it was a very different
situation where now nobody is actually
having to do anything to run the
household because there's staff and um
and and you have children that aren't
you know having to work you have parents
who don't have anything you know or
mothers in particular who don't have
something else that's sort of pulling
their time away from just spending all
their time thinking about you know
Johnny and his it's also not diluting
their Insanity you know if you're in a
tribal group I mean one of the
advantages to having two parents is that
the average of two parents is on average
more sane than either of the individuals
right that's absolutely correct right
right right and well and partly what you
do in a marriage is you keep each other
sane you you see where your partner has
a tendency towards excess and you re
that in right and you do that for each
other and hopefully you do that with
each other's best interests and the
relationship of and the quality of the
relationship firmly in mind and you do
that for the children as well in a more
communal child rearing
environment a child is going to have in
some real way multiple mothers like ants
for sure and in a tribal group most
people are kin anyways and so the role
of mother is going to be distributed
enough so that even if any given mother
is a bit addled in
her
preoccupations there's going to be other
people to whom the child can turn in a
narrow nuclear family where there's a
overindulgent mother let's say who has
far too much time on her hands the child
can be shielded from all other potential
influences which is also something that
the
more narcissistically overindulgent
mother is likely to arrange so so that
it's interesting because it what it what
it what it suggests is
that what it indicates is that even
though human beings are a high
investment species and even though women
are the higher invest sex within that
confine there is a point where
investment becomes a burden rather than
a than a Advantage right no absolutely
absolutely I mean you can't um if you
don't teach if your children don't have
to have the opportunity to learn how to
navigate the environment on their own
they have no navigation skills and I
think that that's essentially what we're
seeing why did you use the word
navigation there um I Ed the word
navigation because life is a journey
right I me we have to navigate our
environment and that means that we have
to learn how to acquire resources we
have to learn how to manage other people
we have to learn how to get along with
other people that we don't like we have
to make I mean there's a lot of things
we have to navigate through storms yes
and so if your response to your child is
there'll be no storms in your life right
or I'll clear all of your storms don't
worry and then all of a sudden you put
children out in the world and they have
skills yeah they they don't have any
coping skills and um and we see this a
lot you know as a college professor I
see a lot of this and and and a private
school with a very high price tag um
where we'll have students who come in
and and it's really a wakeup call about
what life is like because they've had
you know parents who are very
well-meaning you know I think that the
parents who do this they they have the
the god deserv us from well-meaning yeah
I know I think that they think they're
doing the right thing but it's it's not
you know if you carry somebody too long
they're muscle atrophy and um and and
and you can't do that I heard A good
rule from uh I think it was my
brother-in-law who told me this and he
had spent a lot of time caring for very
elderly people and he said that the
appropriate rule of thumb for Elder Care
is never do anything for your client
that they can do themselves and the
reason for that is that you facilitate
you you you devour their independence
right and so then that so there's an
interesting Paradox here with regards to
love right because there's the love that
eradicates emotional distress in the
moment okay and then there's the love
that is devoted to fostering adaptive
Behavior over the medium to long run
right and that's a love that's much more
allied with judgment so for example if
you call your child out on their
misbehavior you cause them short-term
emotional distress but the long-term
benefit of that is that if they
integrate the impulses that are making
them let's say unduly AG aggressive or
reactive then they're going to be more
acceptable to their peers and to the
broader social community so you'll
you'll allow them to be hurt in the
short-term for a long-term gain now do
you know if there are sex differences in
that temporal Focus because see here's
the here's the Paradox as far as I'm
concerned and I watch women try to
negotiate this with their children at
about 12 months of age the thing about
infants because they're so dependent is
that the proper response of a mother to
the distress of an infant 9 months and
younger is fix that now regardless right
so you could say in a sense that the
emotional distress of an infant is an
omniscient signal that care has to be
administered but once the child starts
to become somewhat autonomous which and
that starts to occur when they can start
to crawl then the mother has to make a
transition from immediate reaction to
emot emotional distress to allowing the
child to dwell in that emotional
distress or even sometimes causing it
herself and that's a very tricky uh
transformation because the woman has
become so attuned to the infant and so
bonded to that infant and so responsive
to its signals of distress that to pull
back from I think most of the way women
pull back from that historically was
they just had another child I was just
about to say that exact thing I think
that are interbirth ratios and like sort
of length the the spacing between
children has probably made that conflict
and we call it weaning conflict and that
Sciences um has has made that more
difficult exacerbated it yeah because
one of have a choice you know well also
also if you have a 13-month-old and no
other children around the 13-month-old
is an infant right but if you have a
13-month-old and then you have a infant
the 13-month-old is now a child clearly
right and so yeah well I saw this when
when when we had our second child Julian
Michaela was 18 months old I think
that's about right and you know she's
still pretty little but compared to a
newborn she was an adult right and that
was also the point where she turned more
to me and I you know the there there
seems to be something that's apart from
the inter birth interval let's say there
seems to be something that's crucial
about the role that men play in the
facilitation of that longer term
orientation because men are less suscep
able to the emotional distress of of
both infants and toddlers and along with
that I think it gives men the
opportunity to be less affected by the
emotional distress of children and
therefore to prioritize medium to
long-term adaptive strategies over
short-term gratification of emotional
demand and I think that's part of the
Cardinal role that men
plays well they are agents of the
patriarchy right they're going to be
socializing agents well but but
seriously they're going to be they seem
to me to be
right the women are oriented very
strongly towards the primary care of
infantile emotional distress but that's
not a good long-term strategy okay so I
have a vicious question to ask okay all
right all right we talked a little bit
at the be before we started this podcast
about the corruption of the universities
yes okay now you write in your book a
fair bit about what's being the
interpersonal
and social consequences of women moving
on mass into the workforce so I have a
proposition for you all right let's hear
this the
default moral ethos of women does not
scale it doesn't scale beyond the family
so if you now I'm perfectly willing to
debate this because I'm horrified by the
fact that it might be
true I've watched the universities
transform themselves into holding Pence
for infants mhm yeah no that's a fact
okay and I've watched them transform
themselves into holding pens for infants
as they've become dominated by women who
don't have children so so let me say
this CU I was actually just having this
a very similar conversation with a
colleague of mine and actually here's
what I've noticed so now here's the part
where I'm going to say something that's
a little bit awful okay
okay steal yourself I'm like well no I'm
just thinking like oh Lord I'm going to
get myself in trouble with this okay if
you are that's how you know it's
probably true yeah I know I know so what
I am seeing at universities is that
there is a real bation in the performers
and the not performers and the people
who are the performers are the women and
the people who aren't the performers are
men and I'm going to tell you why if you
are a man who wants all the things that
men want status and power and you're
achievement oriented and you're bright
and you're a go-getter are you going to
go into a job where you go to Oxford and
make six ,000 year definely no you're
not what what types of men do you think
are attracted to University jobs you
mean now I mean
ever you're making $60,000 a year yeah
but I think it I think it's changed and
so so women who go into University jobs
are generally women uh and and this
isn't End Mass true but it's it's in my
experience more true than it's not are
people who are very competent driven
motivated but also want f ability
because they have children I work 60 to
70 hours a week but I get to pick the 60
and 70 hours a week I work I love my job
I have two kids I spend a lot of time
doing things with them and I like the
flexibility and most of the really
competent academics that I know who are
just kicking ass and um doing a really
you know good job in terms of like
Discovery um are women okay okay so
let's and so I think that I think the
university is like falling apart because
because there's a lot of people who are
mediocre and they're generally old men
um who are trying to maintain the system
that rewards mediocrity and then you
have performers coming in and there's a
lot of fion that's being created okay
okay so so there's two two elements at
play there there's this element of sex
and there's an element of performance
okay so let's take this apart a bit and
and see if we can get to the bottom of
it well first of all you can't
pathologize the behavior of one sex
without patholog ing the behavior of
both right right okay so so we'll use
that as an axom and then you asked me
what sort of men were attracted to
University jobs when I started my career
the answer to that was men the the one
in in the universities that were really
working I think my supervisor was a good
example of that he was a football player
he's a tough guy he was extremely
extremely curious yeah right so he went
into a university position because he
wanted to do research and I was
fortunate I when I did my graduate
training at McGill I was surrounded
mostly by professors who actually were
oriented towards discovering the truth
in the course of their research but I
saw that over time deteriorate in in
favor of careerists yes and and I would
put most University administrators in
the bin of careerists and careerists are
interested in the secondary benefits of
their career maybe that's security and
maybe it's status and not interested in
the pursuit the only people I saw who
pursued a University career who had
justification for it who were men their
justification was I'm so interested in
pursuing let's say scientific truth and
the expansion of knowledge that I can
find my status my interest there and if
I have enough money to allow that to
occur that will be fine and I thought
that was a perfectly reasonable game now
you brought up a couple of things there
now and and and let let me say that that
there's a lot of people who go into
science for the I went into science
because I love research and I love
Discovery and and I'm creative and it's
a perfect venue for a creative person to
just think about things and then go test
them it's like so fun and um and and and
I don't think that what what I was
saying is characterizing all people in
all the motivational States I saying on
the whole it seems like that like when
we look at who are these careerists that
go into this field um and you know and
essentially because it's it's low risk
and you know and you you have this
stability um when you have men who are
making that choice it's a very different
car it's a very different phenotype than
a woman Mak okay so maybe we have a
feedback loop okay so imagine this
imagine that as the universities become
comparatively lower paying and more
maternal in their orientation towards
the
students they attract a larger and
larger proportion of relatively
dependent men who aren't adventurous
enough to make it outside of that
sheltered environment and that and what
that does in turn because the men act
out that pattern of dependency is it
reinforces the idea that the
inappropriately maternally oriented
women have what would you say
insufficient charges that they need to
take care of you know like things did
things really do tend to spiral out of
control when a positive feedback loop
emerges right so if you want to become
alcoholic the best way to do that is
start to drink to cure your hangover
right cuz it works right but it produces
a worse hangover and if you want to
develop
agobia have a panic attack and then
avoid right right right so most forms of
serious Psychopathology if you want to
become depressed get sad and then
isolate right so many forms of
Psychopathology are positive feedback
loop so we could imagine that when a
social institution starts to spiral that
there's multiple causal forces at work
that are reinforcing each other because
that would also produce a rapid
transformation but okay so you countered
my proposition that the universities are
deteriorating because they're being
invaded by inappropriately maternally
oriented women by saying yes but they're
also inhabited by and I don't want to
put words in your mouth by men who are
looking for a dependent and
less
competitive Niche is that a fair summary
yes do you think that's in keeping with
what you're observing um I yes maybe the
the um the maternal side of it thing I
don't see but I'm you know I'm a woman
and so it might be harder for me to like
I don't I see it in the concern with
microaggressions with the concern with
with Equity with like the the all these
okay but but I and look we we have that
I mean we have so much of that and I I I
was just telling one of my colleagues
for the very first time in my entire
life and I've been teaching for 15 years
this semester was the first time I
didn't just have like unfettered
enjoyment teaching my evolutionary
psychology class and it's because I'm
terrified every day I go started that
2016 when I was teaching yeah that I go
into my class feeling terrified like I'm
talking about biological sex and I have
to spend a lot of time you know talking
about what biological sex is what gender
is and and talking about because the the
two things play into each in in really
interesting ways actually and um and so
I I spend time talking about that but
I'm thinking to myself I'm going to get
totally destroyed in my because
everything you know ultimately in
evolutionary biology comes down to sex
and the reason I started my book off
with the chapter what is a woman is that
it's so foundational this idea that as a
biological female that you um invest
more in Offspring and what this means
for for you as a woman is it means that
the costs of sex are higher right and
this creates a a completely like a
mating Market where women essentially
get to call the shots with sex right and
Men sort of do the things that they need
to do in order to get chosen um but then
what happens when there's no
consequences for women's sexual behavior
I mean you know because the fact that
women have consequential sexual behavior
has set the stage for things like women
being choosier about sex men more
competitive to be able to get access to
the things that women want in in
partners and when all of a sudden we
make sex non-costly for women which has
been a huge achievement for for women
but it has these huge consequences on
everything because so much of who we are
and our social behaviors and the the
types of things that motivate us are
sort of built around this system of sex
being costly for
women finally the perfect gift for
somebody who has everything a gift that
will reach eternity what could be better
pre-born gives this gift 200 times every
day as they rescue babies whose lives
are in Peril these babies lives are
precious and beautiful their heart
begins to form at conception and at just
3 weeks is already beating at 5 weeks a
baby's heartbeat can be heard on
ultrasound by 6 weeks eyes are forming
by 10 weeks a baby can suck his or her
thumb pre-born needs are helped to save
these precious souls for just $28 you
can sponsor an ultrasound and introduce
a mother to her baby which doubles that
baby's chance at life and right now
through a matching Grant your gift saves
twice as many babies please give the
gift of Life have your donation matched
today by dialing pound 250 and saying
the keyword baby that's pound 250
keyword baby or donate securely at
pre-born
docomo that's preborn
docomo do you do you
think has
okay
obviously the consequences of sex are
extremely high for women and then
secondarily for men clearly and it is
because we're a high investment species
and our children have an incredibly
lengthy and costly dependency period yes
okay okay so we're not going to
eradicate that now you could say now cuz
you know you you you entitled your book
interestingly the title we should just
point this out is that this is your
brain and birth control the surprising
science of women hormones and the law of
unintended consequences okay let's
concentrate on that last part bit that
law of unintended consequences
because it isn't obvious to me and I
think this is implicit in your book if
the birth control pill is a biological
mutation that exceeds the development of
the hydrogen bomb in terms of its
explosive consequences it could easily
be that the unint intended consequences
will swamp the benefits now the
benefit let's let's investigate this as
thoroughly as we can the benefit is that
women are no longer prey to the
terrifying consequences of
sexual interaction right okay but also
more so and that sounds small right now
and in in and and in some ways it
doesn't sound small because they a of
you know women not being prey to you
know sexual behavior is um is obviously
a big problem and that that's great that
women don't have to worry about that but
more than anything in my view the thing
that's been most important and sort of
groundbreaking about the birth control
pill and having reliable contraception
is that it's allowed women to plan well
okay that okay so let me let me ask you
about that because I'm not so sure about
that okay so well it's not something I
want to toss away because obviously the
problem of birth control is a walloping
problem yes okay so so we're not going
to underestimate the complexity of that
problem it's the complexity of
reproduction and so but so here's a
statistic okay um now half of all
30-year-old women in the west are
without children okay half of them will
never have a child mhm so that's 25% of
women 90% of them will regret
mhm so now we have a situation now
imagine this propagating across the
decades we have a situation now where
one in five women will be involuntarily
childless right and that means that
means from the time from 30 onward for
60 years alone right right okay now
that's a walloping cost for 20% of women
and and they're just the women who have
it the worst now now now we can we could
set that against the fact that women are
much more educated and they're much more
autonomous and the and the whole human
race has now access to the intellectual
capacity of women in a way that just
wasn't possible say before the 1960s we
know that women's educational attainment
is the best predictor of their
children's educational attainment after
you factor in IQ we know that the
countries that uh prioritize women's
rights are the countries that are most
likely to develop economically so there
seems to be a huge benefit in the
general emancipation of women but the
costs are overwhelming and it looks to
me like they're mounting you know
because you also see I think it's now
30% of Japanese people under the age of
30 are virginal and the amount of sex
that young people in the west are having
right at least actual sex is plummeting
and it's harder and harder for women to
find a long-term relationship and so so
what do you believe that why do you
believe overall that or do you even
believe that the benefits of the pill
have outweighed the costs um I don't
know that I believe that I don't I mean
honestly I think that this is one of
those things where we can't make I don't
think that I can make a blanket
statement about that for everyone do you
know what I mean like to me that's a
blank that's a individual level um
decision yes exactly so for me right um
using uh birth control for the number of
years that I did absolutely the benefits
outweigh the cost because of how I
played things um I mean it allowed me to
get my degrees and you know start my
research lab and I had my kids when I
wanted to how many kids do you have I
have two I have a I have a daughter was
that enough and a son yeah I was I was
done that was so that was good for you I
was comfortable with that I felt good
about that um right so you managed all
that I did and and and I think that
there are many women who do there are
some women who don't and so I think that
the the question of whether or not the
cost out way the benefit is something
that's best answered at the individual
basis which is why I think the best
thing that we can do for people is to
educate them about what the trade-offs
are that you're making and what the
risks and benefits are because like you
said I mean I think that there is a you
know women are taught almost nothing
about their fertility like nothing well
they're Tau lies well yeah I mean I have
women coming into my class talking about
how so and so had a baby at 40 I'm
saying to my I'm saying like no like
here's the here's the fertility curve
tell me describe the fertility curve the
fertility curve Peaks at
25 and then it begins to decline so
women are at their most fertile at 25
years of age and then it begins to
decline it declines very precipitously
after 35 and um and the probability of
getting pregnant um from General AC of
sex is much much lower than it is when
you're in your 20s and this is really
hard thing for women to have a wrestle
with because course that's for sure I
mean you know I look at myself and I had
you I was in graduate school when I had
my first child and I had to make the
decision am I going to um you know incur
the cost to my career to go ahead and um
and and try to have a baby now and I
know that it'll be relatively easy
biology um
28 right right so you were already by
historical stand old yeah um but I
wanted to go ahead and get why did you
take the risk I took the risk because I
study women's fertility okay so you knew
and it's like so I know I know exactly
what's going to happen if um if I wait
and I I wasn't that wasn't a chance that
I wanted to take and I think that if we
do things like educate women on what the
costs are that that they're you know
sort of facing if they choose to
restrict their fertility for all of
these years like what is the outcome so
first of all they should at least know
what the facts are yeah I don't think
that I don't think that we're educating
about no we lied we there's no one who's
lied to more than 19yearold women
they're lied to in all sorts of ways the
first lie is there'll be nothing more
important to you in your life than your
career is that I think that's a lie
because I know almost no one for whom
that is true whether they're male or
female like I think on on average for
men career is more important than it is
on average for women but having said
that men who have a successful family
and a successful career are much more
likely to Value their family over their
careers so so and I think that's even
more true for women and part of the
reason I think that
you can tell me what you think about
this these lawyers I worked with as part
of my clinical practice so I worked with
with partners of law firms in big law
firms in Toronto and so we have Bay
Street in Toronto which is kind of the
equivalent of Wall Street on a Canadian
scale and there are large law firms
there that are internationally
competitive especially in the world of
Finance because Canada bats above its
weight on the financial side partly
because of our banks so I worked with
these so the deal we put forward to the
law firms this little company I was
working with was you send us your best
people mhm and we will endeavor to make
them even more productive than they are
now in any law firm there's a small
proportion of lawyers who are hyper
competent at law but also hyper
competent at generating business yes and
they're unbelievably valuable because
they feed all the lawyers in the law
firm who can do law but can't generate
business right now some of them are men
and some of them are women and the law
firms are hyper motivated to keep those
women and they can't MH all the women
all the women quit you bet between 28 32
so what happens is they're hyper
conscientious and Brilliant they're
usually attractive as well and so they
do extremely well in high school they do
extremely well in college and university
they do extremely well in law school
like they're on a track High achieving
track they climb all the way up this
track until they're senior partners and
they're working like 70 hours a week and
often by this time but not always
they're married and usually to someone
who has a high income and they look
around having hit the Pinnacle and
they're 30 and they think why the hell
am I working 70 hours a week now the
male answer to that is to win the
contest right and we know that winning
the contest makes men sexually
attractive but that isn't the case at
all for women and so what the women do
invariably is bail out and take a job
that gives them more flexibility in
shorter hours and parties because they
want to have a family right well no
absolutely I mean this is something
that's uh and people don't talk about it
very frequently but I mean you hit the
nail on the head that's exactly what
happens I mean women generally want to
have more work life balance than men do
and it's just because the the reward
structure is very different for male and
female brain of winning the contest as
you say and for men there's a real
reward that comes from that and
historically evolutionarily you there
isn't anything more important than
there's and for women it's about when
you know it's like we like to win the
competition but we also value investing
in our family and in our relationships
and that sort of thing to a greater
extent than men and most women that I
know even women who are really high
Achievers and and have you know High
performing jobs um also value their
family time and a lot of them aren't
willing to make those cost I I know more
people that are women who' foregone you
know really big promotions and
opportunities to sit on this board or
that board um and saying no to it even
though it's an amazing opportunity just
because they don't want to compromise
their time with their children and their
families um and and and this is this is
yeah it's it's a real thing for women
okay it's a real thing for women okay so
so let let me ask you a question about
that too tell me what you think about
this
so my observation of people who practice
as scientists is that one in a 100 is an
actual scientist right I agree with that
okay okay so so then if one in 100 is an
actual scientist and all the scientific
progress depends on that one in a 100
which is also what you'd conclude if you
looked at both publication rates and
impact of Publications same predo
distribution problem and men are more
likely to hyperfocus on their careers
what happens if we take the men out of
those positions and we substitute in
women because are are we going to
attenuate the productivity of the
highest performers at the highest level
of performance well so I don't think
that um you know I think that when you
look at the distributions of like like
like let's just say like super Geniuses
so let's assume that scientists are
super Geniuses okay and when we look at
things like IQ and we look at the you
know um the distribution of IQ between
men and women we know that women have a
more clustered around the mean type of a
distribution there's less variability
and for men there's more variability
which means that with men's IQ
distribution you have fatter Tails
meaning you have more wonder you're
terrified about getting into trouble
that's pretty much what killed Larry
Sumer well I know I know and I talk
about this in my class and this is
something that no nobody has problems
with the fact that you know if you go to
an Institutional like an institution for
people who are profoundly cognitively
you know challenged that you the the sex
ratio there is like 2 to1 male 3:1 male
and we know that more males have
profound cognitive um disabilities
relative to women but on the side of
super Geniuses it's the same thing and
we see more male super Geniuses than we
do female super Geniuses but I think
what that sometimes where things get you
know everybody gets upset about that
when which I don't think is necessary is
that not saying that there's not female
super Geniuses or and it doesn't make
predictions about any individual one
case um because patterns aren't good at
making predictions about what happens
with you or with you or with you and um
yeah so we know that that's we know that
that is a that that's true there's a
gazillion Publications that have been
published to that effect whether we want
it to be true or not it is um and what
this means is that um when you get to
the upper echelons of any type of a
career that requires a lot of G or a lot
of intellectual power um you do tend to
see that there is a little bit of a sex
ratio with men to women this being said
there's a lot of like really um valuable
jobs that don't require as much G that
play to some of women's intellectual
strengths so for example things like
science and medicine are becoming more
female and that's because those are
things that women are really good at
yeah well at those well okay so at those
very high levels of achievement you're
going to require the intersection of
rare trades so imagine in engineering
okay so first of all you have to be more
interested in things than people yes
okay so that's going to skew it mail
right away yeah then you have to be
super bright yes okay now at the highest
echelons there's also going to be a bit
bit of of a male skew there and then you
might also hypothesize that you also
have to be either hyper dedicated so
that would be conscientious or hyperco
competitive or both and for the so so I
we could be in a perverse situation
where well let's play out the extreme
case on average women will make better
scientists than men but the best
scientists will be men we could we could
be in a situation where we'd have to
balance that those probabilities so I
wouldn't say the best scientists are men
because to me that's like making
predictions about individual cases based
on pattern so I will say on average
right we should expect to see that in
the in the pool of best scientists that
is a male bias sex ratio I would agree
with that statement okay okay so let's
clarify the absolute best scientist
could actually be a woman and that
wouldn't violate the patterns of and I'm
not saying that said it more precisely
but yes no I which is but I think that
that matters when you're talking about
something like this I think does matter
matters a lot yeah exactly and so um so
I I think that we yeah so Precision is
important it's time to take your winter
style to the next level dressing for
Success can help you look better and be
more confident so whether you're
attending an important meeting or
networking event or simply want to
impress your colleagues mizen and Maine
has everything you need their clothing
is comfortable breathable packable and
machine washable their dress shirts are
designed to help you close out the year
in style whether you're shopping for a
special someone this holiday season or
giving yourself the gift you really want
mizen and Maine is the perfect gift for
any guy who works travels plays golf or
wants to look and feel great and let's
be honest that's every guy so what are
you waiting for spruce up your winter
style with mizen and M go to mizen
and.com and use code Jordan to get 25%
off any purchase of $130 or more that's
Mi zzen and main.com promo code Jordan
for 25% off
today yeah yeah now okay so let all
right so let's move on to another issue
we talked about what is a woman and that
took a long time and you wouldn't think
so because you would think that would be
obvious and it is because people can
perceive the difference between male and
female at a second um you are your
hormones and you in the time of
fertility those are the two of the first
three chapters so what do you mean you
are your hormones what I mean is a lot
of times especially culturally and in
the US and I I don't know whether or not
this is true elsewhere I just know my
experiences here we have a tendency to
talk about our hormones like there's
something external to us like there's us
our sort of hormone free rational self
and then there's us under the control of
hormones um and that's just simply not
the way that it works um our hormones
are part of the signaling Machinery that
our brain uses to create the experience
of being the person we are right so
they're like neurotransmitters or
anything else when we consider the fact
that there's a bunch of gears and
sprockets that all work together to make
us the sort of person that we are with
our restaurant preferences and
personalities and you know likes and
dislikes um our hormones play a role in
that that's like part of the Machinery
it's like so that shouldn't be
segregated off that's right exactly
right it's this thing that happens to us
right yeah and so I I think that this is
something that on the one hand is really
obvious because it's like I don't think
if you tell that to somebody they would
say well yeah of course it is but it
said but then what happens we change
people's hormones yeah right well
testosterone is another great test case
where um you know here we have a
testosterone clinic on every corner
these days and uh and so people are
changing their hormonal profile thinking
about what it's going to do to this
thing or that thing so for example if a
man is taking testosterone thinking like
oh I'll get my upper body strength back
or maybe it'll improve my libido or
women go on birth control pills thinking
oh I won't have to get my you know um I
won't ovulate and I won't get pregnant
without thinking about the fact that
you're actually shutting down your
body's ability to produce its own
hormones you're taking a daily dose of
the synthetic hormone and when you
change hormones because hormones are
literally a part of what your brain uses
to create you it changes you and um and
so that whole chapter is just really
trying to orient people okay so you're
trying to bring people back into their
body in some way BR back into their body
well you can understand why people have
a problem with this because imagine you
get angry yeah you know and then later
you regret it you're going to feel like
the anger overtook you like it was an
alien force in some ways you know and
the the it seems to me that the part of
us that we identify with is something
like the integrated self right and then
that integrated self can fall under the
sway of impulses that are more
neurologically primordial and we do feel
that as a defeat we do feel that as a
subordination or even as a possession
and so you can see why people have that
hesitancy to identify with their
hormon driven impulses right but by the
same token those elements of you that
might be excessive
when isolated are a part of you and have
to be integrated and they also have
benefits that yeah in all likelihood far
outweigh their costs okay so what do you
think the costs are now you talked about
hormonal substitution in women with the
birth control pill now there's maybe
there's two aspects to that one is that
that the the consequence of the
suppression per se and we definitely
need to talk about that and then there's
also the fact that what the normal
hormonal regimen is
being substitute what the substitution
for that is isn't the same hormonal
profile right because it's not the same
chemical okay so let's start with the
consequences of the hormonal
transformation what has that done to
women and what does it do to the
relationship between men and women yeah
and a really great questions I mean our
hormones we have them for a reason like
like evolution by selection doesn't
select for costly traits and hormones
are expensive you know they're
metabolically expensive they make our
brain reorganize themselves every month
none of that stuff would go on if it
wasn't doing something to promote
survival or reproduction and so by
eliminating that by decreasing or you
know sort of minimizing women's exposure
to C you know cyclicity in their
hormonal profiles you're essentially
changing a lot of the things that are
fundamental to being a woman so just to
give some examples of this you know for
a naturally cycling woman which is what
we'll call a woman who's not on the pill
right because she's naturally cycling
between her two hormones hormones go
through two different states across the
state of a cycle it starts off in with
hormone levels are really low when a
woman gets her period which is the first
day of her cycle and then estrogen
levels begin to increase as her egg
follicles are being stimulated and as
they're beginning to mature that
releases high levels of estrogen and
when estrogen increases because it's
nearing the time when women are able to
conceive in the cycle um it tends like
it causes a lot of biological
physiological and psychological changes
that make women primed for sex so it
makes women smell better to men it makes
women look more attractive to men
because their skin becomes more
vascularized their cheeks become Rosier
they just look more um they just look
sexier they smell sexier they move sex
their voices are sexier there's all of
this research that's been showing that
when estrogen levels are rising in the
cycle that it's Associated get more tips
strippers get more tips yeah they earn
more tip money I mean it's a real
phenomenon and um and this you know this
happens right as women are so why not
flatten that why isn't that just
annoying for women and to so they can
replace that with a more regulated
emotional light and one that's less
unpredictable right but yeah but that's
like equating that's like equating
normal and predictable with the male
pattern yeah right much that's not and
and that's not true it's like that's
that's normal for males and predictable
for males but that's not true for women
that's not predictable for women um
we're different entities and I think
that we've been in this cultural
Paradigm that equates normal with male
for so long that we're even afraid to
ask the question of what if both of our
hormonal States matter like what if
there's two halves to
don't you think it's okay it seems to me
that it and maybe this is unfair but it
seems to me remarkably perverse that at
least some of this can be laid at the
feet of the feminists well let's look at
a couple of the strange things that we
have as a consequence of the of the
feminist world we have the insistence
that career is going to be the most
important part of a woman's life now the
leftist feminists and they're generally
leftist are anti-corporate but they're
pro career okay so that's very weird a
career is to have a career is to be
embedded in what the feminists object to
as the patriarchy right to subordinate
your cyclicity to the hormonal rhythms
of a man you can't imagine something
that would be more like subordination to
the demands of the oppressive patriarchy
right that that kind of like sums it up
you're going to suppress the biological
manifestations of femininity in favor of
a Persona that makes you optimally fun
in the corporate patriarchy right so all
of that I mean there's so I mean there's
so many contradictions at the heart of
that right because another one is um you
know we need to hire women in equal
numbers as men because of the diversity
that they bring to the workforce but
women are just like men right right well
and we do everything we can to suppress
their horal variation that would in fact
make them different yeah no yeah no and
you're right I mean a lot of the people
who um are re who really get nervous
about talking about cyclicity and
talking about hormonal changes um are
sort of the Old Guard feminist where
they and and where they um and and you
know I um I I understand where all of
that originated I mean women as we've
had a very bad history of being treated
pretty poorly because of the fact that
our hormones change but it's like I
think that it's time that we need to
move past that and say you know all of
this this idea that there's something
problematic about cycling hormones is
assuming that there's only one way to be
that's correct and that way as male and
that's wrong I mean to me it's like I I
I reject that um and and and yes our our
hormones change and um and you can say
that they make us unpredictable but it's
actually incredibly predictable like if
you throw give me any woman you bring
her in off the street and put her here
and I ask her how old she is and when
was the first day of her last menstrual
cycle I can tell you with pretty good
certainty what her hormones are doing at
that moment right if I bring a man in
off the street I have absolutely no idea
what his primary sex hormone is doing
because testosterone is reactive it
increases when there's a beautiful woman
around it decreases if your sports team
loses it increases if your sports team
wins your political candidate loses it
decreases so testosterones is incredibly
that's also relevant to why the men
would be hanging around the high status
men because if your sports team wins
then your testosterone testosterone go
more yeah no so I mean I so I I a lot of
these um these ideas that people have
been using to re reject the idea or
object to the fact that um that women
are arey they have cycles and that
there's something problematic about that
are all very much steeped in the idea
that the male way of being is optimal
normal and correct and that the women
you know the female way of being is
problematic and I absolutely reject that
and um and so when we take the birth
control pill what it does is instead of
allowing you to cycle between these two
hormones because you start with this big
increase in estrogen which is
coordinating all the activities related
to sex and conception because this is
the period in the cycle in which sex can
lead to conception how long a period is
that it's about four so that that period
of time is about 5 to S days so about 5
days prior to ovulation and then within
24 hours of ovulation during that window
which we call the fertile window um sex
can lead to conception and that's how
many days a month uh it's about 5 to S
yeah right okay so and and then after
ovulation a little temporary endocrine
structure forms from the m the egg
follicle and it begins releasing women's
other primary sex hormone which is
progesterone and when that hormone is
being released it tends to make us
sleepier it makes us hungrier it makes
us um it lowers our testosterone levels
it does a bunch of things
physiologically that are helping prepare
women's bodies for pregnancy right and
prepare prepare ourselves for the
possibility that an egg might implant
and so women generally are less like
likely to be going out and doing risky
things they're more likely to avoid
contaminants so women's disgust
sensitivity increases there's all of
these things that go on that are
essentially preparing our body for when
they have maximal postcoidal regret that
I bet that you yeah that's so funny and
so you get this waxing and waning
between these two hormones that are
organizing our bodies for two different
activities implantation and conception
or pardon me sex and uh conception and
then implantation and pregnancy and we
go in between these two states and each
of these hormonal States is associated
with different types of psychological
patterns and physiological patterns I
mean even they've done studies where
they scan women's Brains every day
across the cycle and take hormone
measures and it's like you see things
like white matter density increasing um
it when estrogen is high spinal you get
new um dendritic spines in the
hippocampus when estrogen is present and
then these things Retreat when you're
under the control of progesterone and so
we experience all these changes um and
that's a very normal part of of being a
woman and when you take the birth
control pill what what it does is you
get a daily dose of a relatively low
level of synthetic estradi so estrogen
and a relatively and a relatively high
level of synthetic progesterone which is
called a progestin because it's not
biologically identical and this mimics
the state that a woman's body is in
during that second half of the menstrual
cycle when conception isn't possible and
what this does is it sends a signal to
the hypothalamus not to stimulate the
ovaries to produce a new egg because
it's essentially waiting to see what
happen s with the one that was just
ovulated and so when you're taking the
pill you get the same daily dose every
day of this synthetic hormonal State
that's kind of keeping you so in
principle in principle the body's
reacting as if the woman has been
sexually satiated in the most
fundamental way she might be pregnant
yes she might be pregnant essentially is
what that is saying and so one of the
logical consequences of that would that
correct me if I'm wrong she should be
less interested in sex but then but then
this also ties into her the change in
her preference for for men yes so let's
talk about that a little bit because
well one of the things that really
shocked me when I came across this
probably 10 15 years ago was that there
were pronounced VAR there was pronounced
variability in the facial in the faces
that women found attractive across the
menstrual cycle and so if you take
photographs of the same man and you
widen or narrow the jaw widen widen Jaws
is a sign of more uh classically
dominant it's the wrong way of thinking
about competent confident masculine
faces he can do it with the same man and
the women who are in their most fertile
periods prefer the wider jawed men yes
and so okay so so then I thought oh oh
this is a problem because it means that
women who are on the pill prefer
feminine men then I thought that's a
real problem because it might be that
women on the pill really don't like
masculine men uhoh that's probably a
problem because we have a lot of tension
between women and men in our society and
we have no idea how much that's driven
by the fact that the pill is
transforming the manner in which females
perceive the most masculine men I mean
it's it's terrifying if that's the case
right no it's I I mean it's very
provocative right that's the word I
would use it's incredibly provocative um
because research has been showing now
for about 20 years that when women are
in the point in the cycle when estrogen
is high that that's associated with an
increased preference for testosterone
cues like you said um vocal facial and
behavioral masculinity are things that
women are really zeroing in on um right
near high fertility in the cycle and
this of course begs the question well
then what happens if a woman is on
hormonal birth control and is never in
the estrogen dominant phase of her cycle
then what happens and researchers have
since asked that question and what they
tend to find is that women who are on
hormonal birth control desire a somewhat
less masculine male face and male voice
and there's been some research even
showing that if women chose their
Partners when they're on hormonal birth
control and then discontinue it that
this can lead to changes and how they
perceive and how attracted they are to
their partner yeah I read that tell me
if this is right that if they picked an
attractive partner when they're off the
pill they find them even more attractive
but if they picked a less desirable
partner when they're off the pill they
find them even less desirable so it
seems to okay so that's right it
magnifies the consequence of their
choices yeah it's like all sudden the
blinders were off and so now they can if
they chose somebody who that they found
attractive and because they weren't
really paying that much attention to
that or weren't prioritizing that when
they were on the pill all of a sudden
the blinders are off they see it they
love it they're attracted to it their
relationship satisfaction goes up their
sexual desire and their relationship
goes up and if the opposite happens it's
the opposite and we just so do do women
on the pill pick friends as mates oh
interesting I've I've never seen a study
looking at that but I mean it wouldn't
be a far stretch to make that prediction
just because it does seem like women who
are choosing their Partners on the pill
if there's a pattern that's found the
pattern is that women are generally
zeroing in on qualities that have less
to do with sexiness and sexual desire
and masculinity and more zeroing in on
things like um safety and and is this
Nur compion yeah yeah exactly and so
yeah well you can see that like women
women have a very very difficult choice
to make right because they want to pick
a guy who can win a comption with other
guys they want to pick a guy who can
keep the Psychopaths at Bay they want to
pick a guy who's productive but they
also need to pick someone who's generous
and capable of forming responsible
relationships well you know talk about a
play of opposites and you could imagine
that any shift in hormonal balance is
going to skew that in one direction or
another right yeah I mean for partner
choice I always I always tell my women
in my class and and also the men the few
men that are in my class because it's a
university and it's all women now um but
what we gener what I tell them is it's
all about making tradeoffs right and and
and sort of which side of the you know
table you're stacking your coins are you
stacking your coins more on the sort of
sexiness um yeah keeping the Psychopaths
at Bay kind of masculinity types of
qualities are you stacking your chips
all the way over here of good caregiver
provider going to help you know uh with
the children I'm putting them more
toward the middle everybody makes a a
tradeoff and essentially what we do what
our hormones do is they kind of nudge
where we put our stack you know and um
and what we can see when this happens in
mass is you can see and mass changes in
in partner preferences potentially which
is as noted pretty provocative well we
have no idea what the political
consequences of that are right because
you could also imagine this is like the
worst case scenario imagine that there's
a distribution of women who are affected
by hormonal transformation and some
women are relatively unaffected and some
women are tremendously affected well you
could imagine that the tremendously
affected women would have more impetus
to engage
politically right so the ones right so
imagine that there's a subset of women
For Whom the birth control pill makes
masculine men particularly undesirable
right right now imagine that that
transforms itself into Political
motivation because it might I don't not
saying we know this we don't know it
because we don't know anything about the
relationship between hormonal
transformation and political activism
but the probability that there's no
relationship zero right right so we
thrown this new monkey Ranch into the
works in 1960 that's transformed the
relationship between men and women and
we have no idea we really have no idea
what the consequences of that are no you
know I was just talking in my class
about this because I I I think it's
really fascinating because I I I think
culturally we're I mean we've been
feeling the tensions that are created by
this for a very long time now and again
you know I'm somebody I I feel very much
like I I benefited from the pill I was
on it for a decade it was it was a great
time in my life to be on it um that you
know it it didn't cause me any problems
that I'm aware of I got to have my kids
and I want to got to invest and so on
and so forth but um at the same time you
know having this having women have the
opportunity to invest really heavily in
their careers essentially sets up these
expectations where women are supposed to
be both women and men right and so women
now it's like cuz it's not either or you
know it's not like oh are you going to
go to work yeah or are you going to stay
home and take care of your kids it's
like um no I'm doing both things so we
we've set up this this expectation where
women are supposed to be women and men
and I think women's mental health is
suffering hugely as a consequence of
this I think it's been very hard for
women trying to balance everything um
and with the expectation that they're
supposed to be doing all of it yeah but
it also begs the question of what's left
over for the men well and this is what I
think is really interesting so this was
the the Revelation I just had a couple
days ago I actually had it when I was
teaching and I told my students about it
and I'm like I think I'm on to something
with this but you know testosterone
levels are an absolute nater right now I
mean they're at an all-time low um and
there's a lot of regions could that be a
consequence of excess masturbation just
out of curiosity you don't okay why not
cuz I thought masturbating it matches
the increase in pornography you say yeah
no I look I completely yes and and and
that goes on concurrently but
testosterone level no cuz usually when
men are seeing a lot of attractive women
it makes their testosterone increase and
then that's not something that like
takes a major bit after masturbation so
you think that's been put to rest all
right so testosterone levels are
testosterone levels are super low and
you know and there's a lot of reasons
for this you know we know there's a lot
of xenoestrogens and the you know in the
water and that that might be messing
with their hormones and men are heavier
than they used to be and fat aromatizes
testosterone and makes it turns it into
estrogen which also lowers men
testosterone levels um another advantage
of an all carb diet yeah but so here's
another here's here's another
interesting thing and I don't know if
you know about this research but it's
it's really fascinating so you know
culturally we tend to think about
testosterone as being this thing that
like is always good to have super high
right we think it's masculinity and
virility and protection and um but
testosterone is among other things it's
a hormone of mating effort right it's
like effort that you're directing toward
winning and doing things that are going
to attract Partners it also it's linked
with men's interest in extra pair
partners and all these other types of
sort of counterproductive behaviors
within the cont of a long-term pair bond
and so what research finds is that when
men get married or are in a long-term
committed relationship their
testosterone level levels decrease a
little bit and this happens absolutely
functionally because it's essentially
taking easing the foot off the gas pedal
because it's keeping men from doing
counterproductive things within the
context of a parabon when men have young
children so it tilts the more to the oh
okay go ahead men have children their
testosterone levels decrease again okay
and and the more caregiving that men do
the more their testosterone lowers and
this isn't permanent right this is a
shift that men's bodies make in response
to the environmental cues that's very
adaptive and makes a whole lot of sense
with our H they shouldn't be sexually
attracted to the children for example
yeah well exactly they shouldn't be
attracted to the children and they also
like if you've got young children at
home who survival is dependent on you
you need to keep your eye on the ball
and not on the next door neighbor right
right um and um and be and raising your
children and so I started to think about
this and I was thinking about this idea
that you know women are being expected
to be both women and men men are being
expected to be both men and women
because what men are now doing more
household work and more child care than
they ever have before I think women also
tend to find not attractive well no they
do like I mean it creates problems
within the relationship because yeah
women lose sexual attraction in that
context but then men's testosterone
levels could be decreasing in response
to that and that could be one of the
factors that's contributing to men's low
testosterone currently is that we'
created this case where where women are
having to be women and men and men are
having to be men and women right and so
so what it perversely for the men is
that the men who are adopting the
caregiver role more explicitly also put
themselves in the terrible position
where they're Le less sexually desirable
I saw a very funny study at one point it
might have been David bus because he
does funny studies all the time because
he's still allowed to I think what they
showed they showed University age women
the same men engaging in male
stereotyped activities and female
stereotyped activities like vacuuming
for example God Only Knows Why That's
female stereotype but has something to
do with nesting I suppose and reliably
the women rated the men who are engaged
in the more feminine activities as less
sexually attractive right yeah know
Absolut absolutely I mean that is such a
um it creates this cruel bind but I also
think you know it's it's funny I was
having I teach a class called um
Evolution sex and the brain and we ask
big questions so this is is a class I
really enjoy teaching because they
encourage us to ask difficult questions
that nobody really knows the answer to
and one of the questions I always ask
them is about seduction because
seduction is such an important part of
women's sexuality the idea of a man who
has some sort of status and dominance
sort of um like you know uh being
masculine and women find that attractive
and they find that sexual you know like
that's sexually arousing and there's
this whole literature about the idea of
like one of the things that men do is
sort of awaken women's sexuality with
that's the kiss of the prince well yeah
and so then the idea that that now we're
in this environment where we say that we
can't do that right right and and but
but it's like also at the same time you
know it is important that that women
have exercise choice right and obviously
like we don't want women getting
sexually assaulted and so it's like like
how do we create a space like culturally
like what what is the conversation that
we need to be having where it's like
seduction is okay except that it's not
yeah you know I mean it's really it's
really you're definitely going to get
fired you're absolutely 100% Going to
well I see one of the things that's so
perverse about the modern University
campus is on the one hand there's this
absolute insistence that every possible
form of sexual behavior is not only to
be tolerated but celebrated or even
worshiped and on the other hand every
single interaction between a young man
and a young woman is so Rife with danger
that it has to be formulated into a
contract before it can be undertaken
right well you get with that sort of
absolute lenti justness you're going to
get a call for like tyrannical
regulation of sexual behavior because
right because you can't have that much
looseness without a demand for tightness
but it does beg the question that you're
putting forward and and well one of the
answers to that I would say this is a
sort of a sideways answer is that uh
alcohol is a very bad thing to pour into
the mix right yes you know because I
it's it's the case that almost all
sexual assault especially the date rape
types but even the more violent types
almost all spousal abuse all of that
would disappear if alcohol disappeared
this is a conversation nobody will have
about campuses because part of the
problem on campuses is that young men
and young women who don't have that much
experience with each other and who are
also anxious as a consequence generally
meet each other in alcohol fueled bouts
and that's like you would
the you can't say that alcohol causes
violent crime but you can damers say it
you know 50% of people who are murdered
are drunk 50% of the murderers are drunk
the stats are even worse with regards to
sexual assault if without alcohol yeah
yeah without alcohol it would almost
never happen so that's something that
could be started as a topic of
reasonable dis discussion on University
campuses like are there places where
young men and young women can congregate
and meet that aren't fueled by alcohol
induced stupidity and recklessness right
oh now it's complicated because part of
the reason that people drink is so that
they can engage in alcohol fueled
stupidity because it's fun and one of
the problems with the pill is that it
actually allows that to occur without it
being utterly catastrophic now it's
catastrophic in that the rate of sexual
assault skyrockets and that's you know
not trivial but right yeah yeah yeah
yeah okay so you wrote a letter to your
daughter at the end of your book he I
did yeah and so oh I want to ask you a
couple of other things here The Curious
Case of the missing cortisol let's do
two things The Curious Case of the
missing cortisol that's very interesting
and also um a letter to my daughter sure
okay so cortisol yeah uh this actually
is the reason I wrote the book uh and
and I'll say that it's the reason I
wrote the book because uh I was sitting
in a research talk about the effects of
early life trauma on the stress response
in adulthood and I'm sure you're very
familiar with all of this work um
because one of the things that I I do
research on is early life adversity and
affects developmental outcomes and I was
in a research talk on that and the
researcher was just like mentioning you
know oh we collected data on X number of
men and women and we only analyze the
data in um of the men in our sample
because the majority of the women in our
sample happen to be on hormonal birth
control and uh everybody knows that
women on hormonal birth control don't
have a cortisol response to stress and
then yeah that was me I was like no who
knows knows that like everybody knows
that and I so I went up and I didn't
hear anything else because it was just
like I was just absolutely stunned
because that's like what you see with
PTSD and that's what you see with people
who've experienced severe trauma is no
cortisol response to stress it's not
good and so I waited until after the
talk and I went and to talk you see that
in depression too if it's long term yeah
I know I mean it's really really bad and
uh so it's it means no play in response
to stress no adaptation in response to
stress no I know and it's funny because
everybody always thinks that like
cortisol is this bad guy and like wo
it's got to be great to and it's like no
like like stress is the bad guy cortisol
helps you adapt to stress like cortisol
is a good guy who comes in to help sort
of restore homeostasis after your body's
gotten all screwed up from whatever's
stressing it out and so I went and I
talked to my colleague afterward and I
said did you say that women on hormonal
birth control don't have a stress
response and he's like yeah they they
don't I I was really surprised by it too
but then I went to the literature they
don't have an Adaptive stress response
yeah they don't cuz they they they
report experiencing stress and they have
an um their sympathetic stress response
is still going off but they don't they
don't have any cortisol release and so I
went to the literature and he was right
there people had been publishing on this
since the 90s and I I'd never heard
anything about it and I was on the pill
and I'm a woman and I study women's
hormones and anyway after that I was
like what else don't I know about
hormonal birth control and that was what
led me in the rabbit hole that
essentially led me to write the book
because there were so many things that
the pill does in terms of you know
neurobiologically like what it does in
terms of the brain and then
psychologically proximately like in
terms of mood um sexual desire partner
Choice which we talked about an
attraction and the consquence of the
attent okay so women get stressed they
don't have a cortisol so what's the
consequence of that so here's the here's
the really great answer nobody knows um
I'll tell you what we know from research
that's not that hasn't directly linked
the things together um we just did a
study where we found that um you get
changes in the inflammatory response to
stress in hormonal birth control pill
users in ways that's consistent with the
type of inflammatory response that tends
to lead to things like autoimmunity
which we know women are at a much
greater risk for than men does it lead
to depression because there's lots of
evidence that depression is an
inflammatory condition yes depression
and anxiety are also some things that we
know that being on hormonal birth
control control puts you at a
significant greater risk for and um all
of these things are what you would
expect in the case when you have a
blunted cortisol response to stress so
what does the normal cortisol response
do so if you're stressed right so
normally if you and I are um are you
know if I'm being filmed let's say to be
on a podcast that a lot of people listen
to um what would generally start
happening about 5 minutes after I
arrived here is my cortisol would start
to increase and it's doing this because
it knows
I am in a high pressure situation right
it could be high pressure good or high
pressure bad because stress is something
that we get when we're being chased by a
pack of hungry Wolverines but it's also
something that we get on like our
wedding day or Christmas morning for
children is a time when cortisol is
really high opportunity and threat
opportunity and threat so it's
essentially flagging your brain
something important is happening right
so should heighten attention heightened
attention so our brain is aware it's on
its game we start um creating new
neurons in our hippocampus are being
birthed
resp because you should learn you should
learn when there is maximum opportunity
and Maxim threat hippocampus is crucial
for that absolutely and that's exactly
what's going on so that's an important
thing that our bodies do is it's
grabbing on it's helping us absorb these
important experiences so that way we can
have them for later it dumps fat and
sugar change to change yeah to change it
dumps fat and sugar into our bloodstream
so that way we our brain has access to
glucose but also so our muscles do so we
can make a quick get away if we need to
get away quickly if we're being chased
um it's a so it should it should mean
that blunted cortisol response should
mean that women on birth control don't
update their navigational Maps as
effectively because the hippocampus is
also the fundamental place of the origin
of hippocampal maps yeah for Hipp map
navigational Maps right yeah and I've
never seen any research on that in
particular but I have seen it with
emotional memories and what they find is
that women who are on hormonal birth
control have a harder time encoding
emotionally valanced events when you
stress out which is exactly what you
would
expect that means you're not adapting to
the that's really not good no it's not
and I've actually heard from a woman who
was a practicing therapist because I had
gotten several emails and finally
somebody called me and I I I answered
the phone which I don't usually do and I
don't know the number but it was one of
these therapists asking about PTSD and
therapy when women are on hormonal birth
control because they all had the same
theory that women don't respond as well
to therapy for PTS
yeah when're on the pill oh my God
that's also that's that's terrible
because there's no difference between
exposure therapy and learning right
exposure therapy is just the technical
use of the learning situation in the
therapeutic context right exactly yeah
and she said we we don't get the kinds
of outcomes that we need um when we have
women who on the pill okay so what that
implies is women don't women on the pill
can't update as well yeah exactly Jesus
that's brutal yeah and so this is I mean
obviously and and here's this thing that
we're taking just not to obious and in
some cases women are being put on this
teenagers for their skin yeah and it's
it it's like we know nothing about the
longterm consequences of brain
development of blunting a woman's
hormonal own hormone production and then
replacing it with these synthetics ABS
there's no way it doesn't affect brain
development I mean it's like post
puberal brain development is coordinated
by our sex hormones right and um and if
you blunt that you know for a naturally
cycling woman you go through this period
of estrogen and then progesterone and
estrogen and progesterone and when you
shut that down and then just put in this
daily synthetic dose the idea that
that's going to lead to the same brain
development outcomes is getting is that
an extension of pu prepubertal hormonal
balance yeah I mean yeah prepubertal
hormones are such a disaster because
women's hpg axes are still regulating
themselves I mean their brains and
ovaries are still learning how to
communicate everything and so women's
Cycles tend to be messed up a little bit
you know screwy at that time because
everything is learning itself so does
does does putting women on the pill when
they're very young interfere with the
full manifestation of puberty that's a
really great question and it's not one
that anybody knows the answer to it seem
it seems like a logical conclusion from
what you described well exactly I mean
it's not something that I know and the
thing is is we've been putting women on
these drugs forever I've only seen three
studies that have looked at long-term
consequences of hormonal birth control
use during Ence and on development what
what um the research is pointing in the
direction of the fact that using uh
hormonal birth control during
adolescence puts you at a greater risk
of developing major depressive disorder
over the course of your lifetime even
after you've discontinued
it not good stuff not something that you
want your daughter to be suffering so
that way she doesn't have acne um and I
don't think that this is being very well
communicated to the parents of girls um
and and I think it's a travesty I really
do m h okay two more things these the
hormones that women are put on aren't
the bioidentical hormone okay so let's
talk about that and then let's talk
about your your my daughter okay so um
the the the synthetic hormones that are
in hormonal birth control you think that
they would be sort of biologically
identical to our body's hormones and for
the most part the synthetic estrogen
that is in hormonal birth control is um
it it it it has nice binding affinity
and nice binding specificity to estrogen
receptors um the synthetic progesterone
or the progestins that are in hormonal
birth control are not um and most of
them aren't even synthesized from
progesterone they're actually
synthesized from most of them from
testosterone and so chem chemist modify
testosterone molecules in ways that make
them able to stimulate progesterone
receptors um but they don't always have
perfect binding specificity meaning that
they also bind to other receptors for
other hormones and they don't
necessarily have mess they're messy and
they don't have good binding Affinity
where they'll stimulate the receptor and
then fall off and then what that means
is you need higher dose of yeah is you
need to take higher doses to make sure
that you're getting enough um
progesterone which increases the degree
to which they're activating things they
they shouldn't be activ be activating
yeah and that's and that's actually
reason to be um the explanation for why
women experience the blunted cortisol
response uh in response to the uh stress
is that the progestins in hormonal birth
control some of them will stimulate
glucocorticoid receptors essentially
making women's bodies believe that
they're in a stra state of chronic
stress and so women's bodies are then
shutting down the stress response
depression is a consequence of being in
constant stress well absolutely and when
you look at the patterns I mean the
thing about this is that when you look
at the it's all pointing in this
direction where um when you look at the
risk of depression and even the suicide
risk for women who are on hormone Al
birth control especially in adolescents
so 19 and younger is really high during
the first 3 months of use and think
about it this is when their their
glucocorticoid receptors are probably
just being flooded with these
non-specific progestins that are
stimulating those making their body
think that it's World War II you know
and and oh that's just what you need at
puberty well I know and and because it's
already World War I I know and so so
they're feeling terrible until their
body finally shuts down the stress
response and then you don't get any
stress response to stress um but women
actually end up feeling a little bit
better because they're no longer you
know sort of psychologically being put
into this state of trauma like constant
trauma um I think that uh it's it's
crazy to me that this is the best we can
do you know I feel like I think about
how important why aren't we doing better
than this you know I think that the
reason for that we is because because
like there's nothing more important than
this no fertility regulation is so
important for women in terms of being
able to meet their goals that most women
are willing to put up with all the
that goes along with it because
they don't feel like they have any other
choices well they also don't know well
right and they don't know and then the
drug companies are like you know if it
ain't broke don't fix it and so it's
like well the women are taking it you
know so who cares and and and women are
like you know we just having to deal
with it um but but we need too I know we
need to do better I mean and I look at
what they're doing now you know they're
investing in male birth control but all
that they're doing is Shifting the
problem that we have for women and
shifting it onto men So currently what
they're looking at and you tell me how
many men you know that would take this
they're looking at a gel that men rub on
themselves that will lower their
testosterone to such a degree that
they'll no longer produce sperm oh yeah
I mean don't you think that's take
offers
testost I was say there's a bunch of
guys in the room here lined up to take
it yeah yeah I mean it's like nobody's
going to it's just a dumb idea and all
it's going to and it causes the same
side effects in men that our hormonal
birth control does in women because it's
shutting down their sex hormones and um
and and the men that they that they try
it on are like these side effects are
terrible I'm not taking this um and
these are the side effects that we put
up with because we don't have another
Choice It's like because we're the ones
who have the baby if if we end up with
the slip up and so I you know I really
um my my whole push with with all of
this is not that that you know the birth
control pill is terrible and that it's
you know done all these awful things I
mean it's it's a trade-off and it's
definitely going to have societal
consequences that we haven't even begun
to begin to put our fingers on um but
it's all about like educating yourself
what are the trade-offs that are being
made when you go on hormonal birth
control and then also putting pressure
on you know people like drug makers and
policy makers who are investing in
companies that invest in drug companies
and other types of technology to do
something better because we need to be
able to do better um we need to be able
to do better you need to go to
Washington and talk to the Republican
study committee I mean seriously
seriously yes you you need to do that y
seriously yeah I mean we can do better
for women we can do better for men we
can do better for the people that love
them and so my last chapter in my book
the letter to my daughter I wrote
Because I have a daughter I have a
16-year-old daughter and you know one of
the things that I've thought about just
as soon as I was writing this book was
what does this mean for her you know do
I what I recommend for her if she's
sexually active when she's especially a
teenager would I recommend for her to go
on hormonal birth control which I know
works right and it's effective and it's
easy to use and it's easy for a teenager
to use or would I tell her to use
something else and you know ultimately
my conclusion to that is that the answer
to that question is going to be unique
to every single woman and so I included
that chapter in the book because I
wanted all women to hear what I will say
to my daughter when we're having to make
that decision in terms of what are some
of the things that you need to think
about that's how you made it personal
right yeah because um I mean these are
this a really this is a personal choice
and I think that it's really important
that we think about like so for example
how old are you right so we've been
talking about brain development you know
if my daughter wanted to start hormonal
birth control before the age of 19 um I
would want her not to be on it if
there's any other thing that we can do
that I know would prevent her from
getting pregnant if she was sexually
active um just because of what I know
about brain development after 19 the
effects seem to be more or less
reversible like I mean so even if you go
on it and something bad happens if you
discontinue it no harm no foul right but
before that time so the earlier the
onset the the earlier the onset though
yeah well you know that's also the case
with sexual behavior so the biggest
corlet one of the biggest corlet of
early sexual behavior is antisocial
personality so and it goes back to that
dark Tetra totally see that yeah yeah
absolutely absolutely so and so you know
so you know thinking about that and then
thinking about what are your life goals
why do you want to be on it you know cuz
some things you know preventing
pregnancy when you're especially if
you're like a teen girl for example I
mean what an important that's like the
most important thing you can do really
because you know there there's no bigger
predictor of poverty for women than
single motherhood nothing especially
when you're a young single mother that's
just like putting you on the wrong path
um in terms of like what the your
aspirational hopes are and so um you
know it's like considering where you are
in your life considering age considering
the product that you're on and then sort
of going through the different types of
things that are out there considering
non- hormonal options and like what the
cost and benefits of those things are
this just to be mature enough as a
society to actually have a serious
conversation with young people about
sexual behavior as such because one of
the things you know one of your chapters
I can't remember exactly the title is
why didn't I know this yeah right well
we're not very good in our sex education
at schools of walking people through the
dangers of short-term sexual mating
strategies
say
well the pill I'm because want to
casualx because that's the issue it's
like well do you really want to have
casual sex it's like what what does that
mean exactly what are you sacrificing of
yourself who is that going to make you
attracted to who are the males that are
more most likely to accept that
invitation like because we had this idea
and the pill produced this in large part
that we could divorce sex from its
broader context its broader relationship
relational context let's say it's
political and social context and I don't
think any of that's true and so for a
comprehensive sex education Not only
would people have to be educated in
relationship to the sort of biological
realities that you're describing they'd
also have to be educated in relationship
to the psychological realities the
difference between short-term and
long-term M strategies how that's
associated with personality very very
complicated yeah and you know I think
that there's a lot of especially in
because we we tend to think about um you
know high school students or college
students and short-term sexual behavior
but a lot of the people seeking birth
control are people who are in long-term
relationships that are you know just
trying to not get pregnant in the
context of their long-term committed
relationship and even just having honest
yes I I love the idea of having honest
conversations about you know sex sexual
development well and that Rel those
long-term relationships tell me what you
think about this you know my my sense is
that
you you get to try out about four people
in your life and that's it right well
because if you think that fertility
window let's say it's it's it's in
trouble by the age of 30 so you've
really got by the time you have a bit of
a brain so let's say 19 you've got 11
years right okay so how many people can
you get to know to evaluate for
long-term mating suitability in 11 years
well five is a lot I would say right
right so yeah no I think that's funny I
love that you landed on four I mean it
seems it seems reasonable right like I
don't yeah well it's but the thing is
it's reasonable it's very finite yeah
and so that means the importance of your
choice of a committed dating partner is
likely far more important than you think
right cuz maybe when you're 17 you think
I have lots of time it's like well
you're 17 and you've only been alive for
17 years and 10 years might seem like a
long time but it's not right right
especially when you have to
leaving home adopting the
responsibilities of an adult becoming
educated establishing a career finding a
long-term partner you got 10 years to do
that you're going to be running
especially if you're female right yeah
yeah yeah so yeah
interesting all right
well any parting words for the young
women who are how is this changed your
let's let's close with this
yeah what has learning all this done to
your to your views on birth control yeah
that's good enough okay okay let me
think about this for a moment well I
mean to me I had the same blind spot
everybody else had I was on hormonal
birth control for more than a decade of
my life all the while I was studying the
effects of women's hormones on the brain
I was studying psychology and behavior
and the way that women's motivational
shifts change in response to hormones
and I never spent one second thinking
about what the hormones in my birth
control were doing to me psychologically
like I have that cost yes I had an
absolute blind spot and so for me this
whole process really removed that blind
spot um and it I mean it was
embarrassing it was it was really
embarrassing to be a psychologist and
and I like to think I'm a pretty good
one and that and that I know a lot about
a lot and never have to made that
connection really felt like I was like
this is the most this the most
embarrassing thing ever right but uh but
that's how how sort of blind we all are
to it I mean it's also one of the things
I talked about in the book is like St
anabolic steroids are illegal because of
the impact they can have on men's health
because they're sex hormones and they
have these non-specific effects all
throughout the body hormonal birth
control has all these you know
non-specific effects throughout the body
and it's available over the counter so
you know we we've got we've got it's a
total blind spot on on the way that we
treat these two things and well we've
only had three or four generations to
adapt to the biggest biological
transformation in our species history
yeah no I agree agree we're in the early
days of this but it is insanely
complicated and R with unintended
consequences which you're doing a
stellar job of pointing out and
hopefully that will help spark a
conversation that's a bit more uh
productive productive mature and focused
on the fact that uh everything has a
price everything has a price right thank
you you bet right all right to everyone
watching and listening thank you very
much for your attention to the Daily
wire people plus people for facilitating
this live conversation which we're going
to be doing a bunch of in the next
couple of months uh thank you for the
time and effort expended on that I'm
going to talk to Dr Hill for another
half an hour behind the dailywire plus
platform that's usually where I delve
into more autobiographical issues very
interested in how people's interests how
they're calling makes itself manifest in
their life often from an early age so
we're going to find that out these are
very useful conversations to attend to
if you're interested in well hearing
from people who've had a stellar career
and often done a good job of balancing
that with their life how they managed it
you know and you can't hear too much
about that as far as I'm concerned so
thank you everyone for your attention
talk to you
[Music]
soon